# Java Beans and POJO (Plain Old Java Object)

A Java Bean is a reusable Java component, which can be maneuvred (potentially visually) by a build tool.

- It is serializable;
- It has a no-args constructor;
- Its properties are private;
- Each property comes with getters and setters to access it.

A POJO object can be any java object that doesn't implement any interface and doesn't extend any other class. Its properties aren't necessarily private, and it isn't mandatory to implement getters and satters and so on.

## Getters and Setters

These are just methods that act upon some properties, their names being tied to the names of the properties. They can be

- Simple methods;
- Boolean methods;
- Indexed methods;

The prototypes of these methods are standardized and tied to the name of the properties in order to be called at run-time via reflection.

Run the getters and setters examples via

```
javac GettersSetters.java && java GettersSetters
```

## Inversion of Control and Dependency Injection

Assume we have a bean called `Base` which has a property `Member` that is another bean. There are multiple ways for `Base` to control `Member`:

- Direct control: the `Base` object controls the `Member` object from creation until destruction;
- Dependency injecton: the `Member` object is injected in `Base`, which means that the `Base` object receives the `Member` object via a method argument (usually a setter), a constructor argument or the value of a property.
- Inversion of Control: in this case there exists a component (called IoC container) which controls `Base` at run-time and it transmits `Member` to it from an external source, like an xml file, an event, an adnotation, a DI injection.

It is worth noting that IoC includes DI.

The control examples can be generated by running 

```
javac Control.java && java Control
```

Note that this will also generate the Base and Member compiled classes, in addition to the Control compiled class.
